the subject of your lectures are.
I know you're giving a series of them here.
This was called, at their request, it was called the beginning of the subject, and they said we want you to talk about the history of warfare, and I called it A Brief History of Warfare, Past, Present, and Future, in 15 pages.
I just got to the finishing line by the 15th page.
And did you open it up to questions?
Yes.
Very good questions.
What are people interested in?
I'm curious.
What's the lay question there?
Immodestly.
Generally, I'm going to talk about it.
But immodestly, I do have to say, it's very strange, because it's not the case in my own country, but I do have a strange sort of leadership in this country.
I mean, they...
People write to me in Britain, and when I come, they say, I'm one of your fans, and I've got all your books.
I mean, it's very peculiar.
And I think... So I fit right in by bringing the Navy people in.
And I think some of the people come to lecture them because they want to meet me.
They're not so much interested, I think they're interested in the subject, sure, but they're interested in, which is a very peculiar feeling, because, I mean, I'm a family man.
I live in the country.
My children, my wife, of course, have put me in my place there.
It's very peculiar to come to the U.S.
and meet people who call themselves.
Well, you certainly have developed an expertise that has gone beyond academe, and that's quite phenomenal, isn't it?
Well, I approve of that, because I think...
One of the things I've got a game stack, I was an academic for many, many years.
I hesitated whether I should be calling him Professor.
I mean, I think the way it's just as bad in our country, the way academia sort of shut itself off from
The ordinary educated public, I think, is disgraceful.
It is terrible.
They talk to each other.
They've invented this weird language.
The more obscure it is, the cleverer they think they are.
As a critic, for instance, I will go through the catalogs of university presses, and you will see, I think, a title that on the surface looks wonderful.
You say, oh, I can't wait to see what this guy does with this.
But when you get it, it has been written for his colleagues.
The whole purpose is to obfuscate.
And you might have the germ there of a wonderful story, but you've totally lost it.
And that's why I really applaud you for writing and publishing in the general and the trade, as opposed to the specialized presses.
I mean, I could have sold my book to Yale University Press.
And they were very interested.
And it wasn't because I wanted... Well, yeah, I had a little bit too much commerce.
I won't deny that.
But, you know, you want a right to be read, I think.
I'm sorry to be commenting here.
Not at all, no, no, because, I mean, I think you're absolutely right.
I've never met him, but I call him a friend because we correspond.
I've never even spoken on the telephone, but we correspond quite frequently.
He's a young American called Victor Davis Hanson from the University of California, Fresno.
which is not one of the major branches of the University of California.
And I think he's an absolutely outstanding military historian.
He's a classical scholar.
And he wrote a most remarkable book for five years ago called The Western Way of Warfare.
It was about the Western Way of Warfare battle in the Greek city state or something called it.
And he was published by Viking.
And he was urged by older classical scholars not to publish it as a book, but to try it out as chapters.
It's very revolutionary stuff, Victor.
You know, it isn't orthodox.
You know, you're a young scholar.
You must be very, I mean, you must sort of
offer it to the judgment of your peers, and I think they meant your elders and betters, too.
And then they said, above all, you mustn't publish it with Viking, which is not an academic publisher.
If you're going to publish the book, you ought to go to an academic publishing house.
And in fact, he turned them down.
It's been extremely well received, but he says that he's no doubt that his academic career has suffered as a result.
Isn't that ridiculous?
So they don't recognize him?
Because he went to, the older professors at Stanford asked him to apply for a tenure position, and he went there, and the older professors voted him in, and the younger professors voted him out, and he didn't get the job because he didn't have, it was his first book, and it wasn't
from an academic press.
That's absurd.
That's really ridiculous.
But I know where they're coming from.
I mean, the whole point is you're writing to impress your colleagues, not just to impress them, to speak to them.
It's almost they're so proprietary.
It's their turf.
I know I found that when I was, I did a lot of research in libraries and universities, and I encountered a lot of resentment, because how dare this professional writer
I mean, I won't name any names, but a fellow in California.
How dare I come out and try and write about Henry Huntington?
He spent 20 years researching him.
I mean, he was, he was, oh, I just hope they don't give this guy the book to review.
Sure.
But I mean, I think his attitude should be, how wonderful.
Great, yeah.
Somebody who hasn't devoted 20 years of his life to my special subject is actually interested in you, and what can I tell him?
Well, this fellow's book was just published by the University of California Press.
Nice book, well done.
It's an unknown book.
I mean, I haven't seen a single review of it, but anyway, we'll see what happens.
If you don't mind just talking in generalities, because books really speak so eloquently for themselves.
And you do even, you mention in the History of Warfare book how you became fascinated
by the subject, but I wonder if, for the sake of some quotations, you could go back.
I think my father, who was a very nice father, I was devoted to him, and he made great influence on my early life, and he'd been a soldier in the First World War.
Just, you know, called up.
draftee, but it was clearly the most important thing that had ever happened to him, and nothing ever happened like that again.
A defining event of his... Yes, exactly, a defining event.
Not that he was a bore about it, and he didn't go on about it, but you could tell that it was a dramatic passage in his life.
And I suppose that, and he was admired, although he went back, he was a
a... I don't have it in America.
He was what was called an inspector of schools.
It's a sort of... It's a national service in Britain.
They sort of set educational standards.
They go right to schools sometimes.
And that's what my father did.
Rather like a roving principal, actually.
So he didn't.
I mean, he had a very staid life when he came back from the war.
But it was clear that that was just a great thing.
And then during the war, he went down his area.
He had a district of schools.
The HMI, they were called Her Majesty's, or His Majesty's, inspectors of schools.
They had districts, and his district was in London, and it was evacuated to the country for the war.
And he sort of took the schools down, and they had to be put out into village halls, and fairly buildings, and we spent the whole war in the country.
And it happened to be the bit of the West Country, which the Americans came to.
We had to be smack in the heart of it.
Well, the 29th Division and the 1st Division were waiting to go to Normandy.
And I suspect that there were more Americans than English people in our bit of England.
I mean, they were jam-packed.
And the skies were full of American airplanes, and the roads were full of American equipment, and the towns and villages were full of American soldiers.
And it was a very, very extraordinary spectacle for a nine- or ten-year-old boy.
And I could see something tremendously dramatic was happening.
And I was already very interested in history.
I was sort of a bookish little boy.
And when I started to study history properly in high school, I got extremely interested in history in the Second World War.
And when I went off to Oxford in 1953,
you had to choose a special subject.
There was a set history course, but you also had a choice of special subjects, 12 special subjects, which one was military history, so I chose military history.
And I suppose then that fixed it for me.
And I had this, I thought, you know, I thought you could actually be a professional military historian.
So that's what I became.
This book really does more or less crystallize a lot of the earlier books.
You don't mind my jumping around.
This is a history of warfare.
It's a very bold thing to attempt, isn't it?
And one point, I should have been on trial.
I should have been on trial.
Well, the thing was, I was like you.
I read and read and read and read.
I had a huge collection of books.
Mind you, I read them.
It's not a game.
bibliography which academics don't prove on because it only contains the books which I actually find useful.
I don't, you know, you can, you see a text reference in a book and you think, oh, and you turn to the back and the text reference is that long and you think, well, I wish you'd say which was a really useful book because what are these people doing?
Are they writers or are they librarians?
You get the feeling that most
I mean, they're so concerned to impress their colleagues with not merely what they... The apparatus, they call it.
The textual apparatus.
Exactly.
With their knowledge of how many books actually bear on the subject that the text references I don't find useful.
My text references are books that I actually think other people ought to read on the subject.
But anyhow, I'd read, asked about it, I owned all these books, and I thought, I've done, you know, I've done battles, I've done armies, I've done generals, I've done war at sea, I've done history of the First and the Second World War.
I really ought to try and put it all together, really try.
If I don't, I shall be senile quite soon.
Did you expect to learn something yourself?
Yes, I did, very much.
Were you trying to sort things out for yourself?
Yes, I was.
I always think that writing a book is a piece of self-education.
You probably felt the same about it.
Sure, it's a discovery.
Yes.
It's almost serendipity.
What did you... Obviously, Klausowitz was a major target.
I hate to use the word target.
That's not the right metaphor for a book on warfare, I suppose.
Well, I used that as a device, really, just to get started.
I thought I knew more than I did.
I don't know whether you thought you knew more than you did when you began.
I'm going to a newspaper event, and I've always felt that you need to know ten times as much as you're ever going to put in the book or anything.
But I don't think I just felt that way.
The way to answer your question, no, I...
I knew that, but I did think I knew a lot, and there were some things I thought, when I actually came to write them, I either physically didn't know things, or I knew them but I hadn't sorted out what their significance was.
And so I did write continuously for nearly three years, but I quite often stopped for
perhaps a month, to get something really clear to myself, particularly about the sort of behavioral science of warfare and the anthropology of warfare.
And I later on discovered that I didn't know nearly as much as I thought I did about the nomad peoples
I thought I'd read a lot about them, but I hadn't read enough.
I know the Turks, Mongols, people like that.
You really opened my eyes on the Cossacks, I have to say.
I didn't realize that they were so... I'm searching for the right word, but I always thought they were just totally ruthless and, you know, that they would charge into the valley, but they were very cunning.
NOMADs are, I think.
They weren't exactly NOMADs, but I've subsequently read more than I knew about the Plains Indians.
Great similarities.
I mean, the Plains Indians were ferocious, but they were very good at saving their own skins, too.
They'd run away.
There was one review I read of your book about death.
You certainly aren't worried about death.
on political correctness.
I mean, you call it the way you have, I mean, it's very bad form now to even say Indians now.
They're Native Americans.
I know they are.
I do say Native Americans.
I know that's fine.
They're Indians.
I mean, and it's almost verboten to say that they were fierce and, you know, cut living hearts out of the chest.
Actually, one of the nice things about being
English-speaking in America, but not being American, is that Americans will let you say politically incorrect things, but they would not allow a fellow American to say.
It is.
I think you're absolutely correct, but who could argue with the observations?
I mean, they're perfectly valid.
Do people find it comforting and a bizarrely ironic kind of a way to be
told that, well, it's part of human nature.
Warfare is part of human nature, so it's almost excusable, I guess.
Some do and some don't.
I think you get great fierceness.
You get through to the Margaret Neat School, you know, war is an invention.
I mean, Margaret Neat really is the inventor of political correctness.
Sure is.
and I think not only women although feminism is much much stronger in the United States than it is in Britain for example and you do get American women who are very very fierce on the subject of if you say well it's possible that man is I don't know I really don't know if you say it's possible that man does
have innate aggressive urges.
They get very cross about it.
Well, and now, are they allowing women to be fighter pilots in the UK?
They're thinking about it.
They are trading, but it hasn't gone as far as it has in this country.
I wonder how that'll play out.
Don't matter.
We're having great trouble with women aboard ships.
I used to live three years in an aircraft carrier.
I can't imagine what it was like.
to have women on the ship.
It's a bafflement to me that they're actually doing it.
You were in the pre-woman Navy.
I was in the Vietnam War.
Right.
When I read about your father going off to World War I and how he regarded it, I regarded the Vietnam War in my life precisely the same way.
This was an event that I never questioned.
Were you a regular?
I was a reserve officer.
I went to OCS at Newport.
I spent three years as a junior officer on the Ariscity, quite a marvelous aircraft carrier, actually.
Right.
And did two combat cruises to Vietnam.
What, was that a fleet carrier?
It was an attack carrier.
It was an old 27 Charlie, an Essex-class carrier.
Very much, yeah.
It was the last Essex-class, but it had the hurricane bow, and they later put an angle deck on it.
Yeah.
And then it was the first ship.
How many aircraft?
About 85.
It was always an attack carrier.
In those days, they had attack carriers, and CBS, which is an anti-submarine kind of carrier.
Now they're all carriers, I guess.
Political correctness has come to the Navy now, so you can't discriminate one carrier.
But I mean, there was a second-class kind of an aircraft carrier.
which really didn't have the attack in the craft.
We were a pretty good ship, actually.
We were risking quite a bad fire in 1967, the year before I joined, which 47 people were killed.
And the Enterprise had a forest all had a fire the next few years.
Anyway, this to me was, I can't imagine my life without that experience.
And I really feel badly for people like Bill Clinton, who's a year or two younger than I am, you know.
I don't know what I would have done for him, but I'll tell you, if he ran for president 20 years ago, I wouldn't have voted for him.
Right.
I really would have held this against him.
Because he did dodge the draft, regardless.
There are two ways around that.
Right.
I'm not asking you to comment on that.
No, no, well, I mean...
Well, I have met him, yes.
I went to the White House, really, in May, before he went to Europe for the 50th anniversary of D-Day.
He had little conference on people to advise him about D-Day and how it should be commemorated and what particular Europeans felt about his 50th anniversary.
to make speeches in different countries.
And he wanted a sense.
Well, I must say, I think he's an impossible position.
I mean, to belong to the war, to belong to the Vietnam generation under the draft doctrine, and indeed head of his country.
And that would be the commander-in-chief of the forces, and in a position to send men off to die, you know, which is awfully hard when he was...
But that's probably the first time that we've had a president who was... I just can't think of any other case.
I mean, you always had to be a... Well, they all were up there.
The Truman had been in the First World War.
Eisenhower, of course.
Nixon had been.
He was a naval officer.
Kennedy was a war hero.
John didn't get the Silver Star, but... Did he?
political.
I mean, he was in a flight, but he was in the service.
Oh, right, yes.
Ford was... Good question.
I think he was in the Navy.
Bush was a hero.
Bush was a great hero, yes.
This is the first non-military president, isn't it?
That I can think of, but hasn't really... I mean, you could never be divorced in the old days, and you had to have been in the service.
And of course, Reagan had been
movie actor.
Well, he never served in the military.
No, because he was making warfare.
But he's, you throw the book out with him on everything.
Yeah, yeah.
Geez, I'm losing my track.
I hope you don't mind my jumping around here.
There is a neck, and you have it.
It's knowing what detail to use to make a readable book.
Maybe it's instinctive or what, I don't know what it is, but you make your books very, very accessible, and yet you don't pander to your reader.
You really do gather the information quite selectively.
I mean, some people say that you have this fascinating arcania, I guess.
I write.
I have very regular routine.
I get up at...
I don't start very early, but I get up quite early and I sort of read papers and sort of potter about.
I'm very slow in the morning, but about ten o'clock I sit down at my desk and then I'll stay there all day until seven.
My wife and I have a sort of quick lunch and I sort of
do kind of go into a mood and I find that as I go along I think the ideas come and I think it's very important to let the material you've got to have a lot of material and you've got to take notes and you've got to and I often sort of take you know I write little sketches to myself
how i think it'll go um but i think that it is i think writing is a flowing process and that you've got to uh listen something you know something tells you i don't know what it is but i mean something tells you what you should be doing uh sometimes it's sometimes you know you've got to get to something and that is laborious uh and you rework it and you rewrite bits of it because you're trying to trying to get to the uh
to the point that you know you've got to make.
And getting there is a slog.
But very often, and I think when it's best, it just sort of comes to you, and you can tell whether it's right or not.
And then at the end of the day, the next morning, I usually reread the end bit of what I've done the day before.
And if I think, well, that's all right, I can begin again.
Then I go on.
Sometimes I say, no, that's
doesn't mean, and I rewrite the last page.
And then, by rewriting the last page, I'll start again for the next day.
Do you use a word processor?
No, I do have a word processor, and I write journalism on a word processor.
But I alternate between a pen and a very, very old, 40-year-old portable typewriter.
And I think I write best on the typewriter.
I think, because it's
You can get quicker with a pen.
And sometimes I'll stop, put the typewriter aside, and I'll write a bit with a pen, and then I'll type it back onto the typewriter.
But I think the point about a typewriter is that it does produce something that looks like a printed page.
And it's sharper, and you get good phrases, and you get good punctuation, and sentence length, and that sort of thing.
You know, there have been studies, I think, here at MIT, as a matter of fact, that
that indicate what you write on a word processor or a typewritten page reads differently on a screen.
Assuming it's the same text, what you see reads differently on a screen than it might on a manuscript page and on a printed page.
And I've noticed that all the time.
I think you have to have this sense when you're writing, it's going to look differently when it's in print, isn't it?
It's going to read differently in a sense.
We notice this all the time.
When you quote people totally accurately, they'll say, jeez, I know I said that, but it looks different from the way I said it.
Have you ever read into that?
Do you write on the web, Professor?
Yeah, I do.
I'm a journalist.
Yes, but also you presumably are doing a lot of quoting from...
And I'm doing ancient text.
And a lot of inserts and stuff.
Yes.
It makes revision.
It's a dream to revise.
And the pagination, you don't have to retype the whole thing and re-paginate the manuscript.
But I just, I write, I type very quickly.
Oh, do you?
I'm not a very good typist.
I typed with four fingers on my...
left hand and two fingers on my right hand.
So I'm not a proper typist.
I actually took a course in college, and I had to get permission, I mean, a typing course.
I said, you know, I want to be a writer.
I really could use this course.
But I went to a liberalized college, and they said, listen, you can't take typing.
I said, look, I can really use this.
So they allowed me to take a type.
It's one of the best things I've ever done.
I can type.
I can touch type.
As quickly as, you know, almost as fast as I can think.
Really?
Yeah, I can do it.
I can do 85, 90, you know.
Great.
I mean, my Lexington piece, I wrote it in 90 minutes.
That was under deadline this week.
Gosh.
And it's a good, clean, accurate... I like to take a little more time usually than that.
Yeah, but I'm a great believer in quick writing, too.
When I write for the newspaper, I love them saying to me at midday, 1,200 words by 5 o'clock,
It's very good for you.
I love it.
I respond to the Deadly.
I really do.
My best stuff comes in a Deadly.
My wife gets furious.
Do you review books as well?
Yes, I review books from the New York Times periodically and other newspapers.
The column that I do is a combination, which is why I'm able to market it.
It does involve a little bit of a review and some criticism in there.
And I work in these interviews.
I'm sure you'll be pleased.
I know I haven't asked you any timely questions, but I know you work.
It is pretty interesting also when you point out all these sites where battles have been held repeatedly.
through the centuries.
Do you have an explanation for that?
Yes, it's more than a coincidence, isn't it?
I think that geography imposes on us more than we realize in all sorts of ways.
In fact, I'm trying to do that in this book I'm writing about warfare in North America.
The theme of the way American geography has
direct channeled the inhabitants of North America into patterns of movement.
That is very striking.
For example, the British surrender, the end of the War of the Revolution, happens at Yorktown on the Virginia Peninsula in between the York and the James River.
and the great abortive campaign of 1862 happens uh it actually begins at yorktown mcclellan lands at yorktown goes up to richmond and comes back to yorktown meanwhile of course there's a great revolutionary naval baton fought off yorktown between the merriac and the monitor out in hampton roads and uh yes and i mean uh
I mean, the Revolutionary War is Yorktown.
MacLellan's 1862 campaign is Yorktown.
The Merrimack Monitor is just off Yorktown.
And then I was reading.
I mean, just last week, just before I came, I was doing something because I wanted to get something in about American air power.
And I began to read a wonderful biography of the Wright brothers.
And I knew they'd gone to the Outer Banks to Kitty Hall.
Wilbur, you know how methodical the rights were, the most extraordinary thing.
I mean, they are geniuses, it's no doubt.
Incredible, but incredibly methodical.
And they'd written to the U.S.
Weather Bureau asking for a list of wind speeds all over the United States, and
They had certain criteria.
They didn't want to be a big city in place.
People came and watched them.
So Wilbur looked down on his stuff.
He found the sixth windiest place in the United States.
That was Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.
So he said that's... I mean, he knew it was miles from him.
Nobody ever went to Kitty Hawk.
He put all his stuff on a train in Dayton, Ohio.
And he took it to Old Point Comfort, which is at Yorktown.
This is coincidence.
Well, I wonder, you know, I know maybe it is coincidence, but it's not coincidence that the British surrender happened at Yorktown, that the McClellan's campaign against Richmond, because the British got
They were campaigning all over the side, and they got driven back beyond Richmond, whereas McLaren was trying to get at Richmond, and if you want to get at Richmond, you've really got to go to Yorktown, you know, if you're coming by water.
I can see that.
But maybe it was coincidence.
But I thought, what an extraordinary coincidence.
But you cite that one place in Turkey that has 15... Adrian Opal, yes.
But there's a good reason for that, because the mountains and the sea...
kind of make you go to Adrian.
Is it still as fascinating a subject for you as it was when you were around?
Well, I'm by myself, it is.
I'm always thinking about it.
I do find while I'm doing radiophonians, which I've just done one now with people, it seems to drive you back to
I mean, you do get the politically correct lady who wants to say, how do you justify killing innocent people?
You do tend to get these very reluctant questions.
No, I don't.
But then you say to her very carefully that I don't just let... And then she says, but you're killing... And there's a presumption that you condone this, but you don't.
Right.
I think that's a very important point.
A criminological question.
A criminologist is presumably somebody who approves of crime.
Isn't that ridiculous?
It's the old killing the messenger.
Yes.
I'm surprised some of these women don't ask you about why you don't deal with the Amazons.
Yes, that would almost be a legitimate question.
Yeah, they usually don't get me about that.
So I think, what is your answer to that?
My answer to that is probably not real.
Do the women really want women to go?
Were there, in fact, Amazons?
A band of women warriors?
I don't think so.
It's mythic.
I think that's probably the answer.
You have nothing to support any of their... It really is a male-dominated...
And you do believe that it is innate to the male?
To the male, I think.
And not to the women?
No, I mean, clearly there's the odd, extremely tough and aggressive woman.
I saw some... Don't the Israelis have women in their... Yeah, they don't let them... They don't let them.
They're not supposed to go forward at brigade headquarters.
But I was watching... I was up in...
New Brown Street, New Jersey, the day before yesterday, and I was waiting for a car, so I turned the television on in my room, and, I mean, of course, American television is extraordinary, because you have 20 channels where... Nothing like any of them.
But one of the channels was, um, the chat show, and they had eight women bodybuilders.
Have you seen that?
I mean, one of them, she kind of was a woman, but in every other respect, I mean, her face, a manner, she was a man.
She was six foot two, and I wouldn't fool around with her either.
That's funny.
What can I ask you that, John?
So your next book is, how do you respond to suggestions that you may romanticize?
I do get asked that.
I try and say I don't.
At the same time, I'm forced to admit that there is something romantic about war.
I mean, war is many, many things.
There's no doubt that some young men, many young men, particularly before anything else that happens, do get
I'm sure when you first went on your aircraft carrier, you felt quite a strong emotional surge.
Well, I enjoyed getting an extra roll of ribbons.
I had three rolls of ribbons, and I'm very proud of them.
And I like my dress whites.
Sure.
You haven't read, it's not a widely published book, but I thought it was absolutely wonderful, a memoir of serving aboard a carrier.
in the Second World War called Crossing the Line.
It hasn't come to you, has it?
No.
It's quite new.
What impressed me was that the foreword was written by Professor Lawrence Stone of Princeton, who's a British historian, as you know.
And I know Lawrence.
He wrote the most glowing introduction.
He had been on an aircraft carrier as an aircraft control officer on a British aircraft.
This is a man who's a friend of yours, who later became a professor of English literature at Princeton, I think.
But who's the most unlikely professor of English literature you can imagine.
He came off a dirt poor little ranch in Wyoming, and he joined the Navy as a ordinary seaman, apprentice seaman, seaman apprentice, before Pearl Harbor,
Because it was a way of getting out of my energy.
And he was then... I think that's true in a lot of cases.
Is it?
Yeah, I went to OCS.
I would say half of my section was from Iowa.
I mean, the first time Mike had ever seen the ocean was when he showed up to go to OCS.
Right.
You know, and I wouldn't be a bit surprised because the skipper of my ship was from Oklahoma.
I mean, he was a terrific, he was a World War II pilot.
I think he made it to Averill, and a lot of them are from Oklahoma, or the Midwest.
There is a charm and an attraction to the allure of this.
Where did you go to Wellsville Liberal Arts College?
Bates College up in Maine.
Oh, right, yes.
A small college.
Good liberal arts college of about a thousand students.
And then I went to graduate school at Penn State.
Oh, right.
I lived in Washington and had a fellowship down there in journalism.
Spent three years in those?
Maybe.
And I loved it.
I loved it.
Absolutely.
It's one of the great—you're young, too, you know.
It's amazing.
I used to, for pleasure, go up and just watch those airplanes take off and land.
Of course, I was an unrestricted line officer, so I—
I stood my bridge watches, and I would have pecan and steer that ship into the wind and launch aircraft.
I think I could still do it today, 25 years after.
Could you know I could?
I would remember everything, make sure the number three elevator is up, check the anemometer for the wind, give the commands to the
signals to the task group.
I think I could still give the proper sequence of legs, you know.
It's very basic.
You know, Corbin is a turret.
You know, it's tough to know the sequence.
And, you know, it's drilled.
It was pretty exciting.
It was pretty exciting to hear those airplanes flying that way.
Yeah.
Well, it is one of the wonders of the world, really.
The aircraft.
Do you think that
It's flying off, landing on is more dramatic than flying off.
Yeah, I've done them both.
Oh, well, getting shot off is pretty exciting.
Right.
I mean, you do, it is 1.7 seconds from zero to... Right.
They're going to get off the deck, whereas if they're landing on, you're not absolutely... Well, no, we have what's...
How are we doing?
Well, you have a reading.
Yeah, my lady is coming to get me fairly soon.
Okay, so I think I've asked you a lot of questions.
Do walls work like the Great Wall of China, the Maginot line?
They work better than the critics accuse them.
I think the Great Wall of China, of course, because that was against Cavaliers.
There's no line that didn't work.
But the one place the Germans made an assault on it, they had a hell of a job.
I think walls work better than they're driven credit for, really.
The trouble with, they're like aircraft carriers, they're incredibly expensive.
I think the investment probably never pays off, but they do.
I think the Great Wall of China worked quite a lot of the time.
I don't know about the carriers.
I think the investment does pay off, if you want to.
Yes, it does in carriers, but the thing is that what I meant was that the costs of
The fortification had put it up to the car.
Exactly.
I mean, only one or two nations could build it in a craft carrier that you have.
They've got billions of dollars.
But what a thing to have, to be able to send a whole airfield a few miles off the coast to come place.
You know, I mean, Saddam Hussein has to think twice, doesn't he?
Absolutely.
And you could have them there ready to go.
Yes.
They're really quite amazing.
We used to say, you know, the nuclear...
Our lifespan of nuclear war was that we were all targeted.
Every time we crossed the Pacific, a Russian bear, a red bear would come down and pick us up.
You know, just so we all knew it was a game.
They were following us.
There were submarines out there.
And so if war was declared, you figure you've got a 10-minute lifespan.
You've got maybe 20 minutes to get your aircraft with their weapons off.
And that is, they say, bend over and kiss your ass goodbye.
That's about how much time you have left.
It's a pretty exciting thing.
I'm going to ask you to inscribe my copy of this book.
I apologize for not asking more.
I enjoyed it.
While you're writing that, what would you say your most
the book people ask you about always about the face of that really yeah always um and why why is that what you say because uh it makes it very personal because no it's not only that it's because uh something did some strange um
I was on a strange mood to say to me when I wrote that book.
I had, I mean, it was the first book I wrote.
I was, I began writing it when I was, I began writing it in 1972 when I was 38.
I got a sabbatical from Santos.
I sat up, you know, I didn't write in his home, I sat up in a funny little windowless room in an old
I did go into a sort of trance writing that book.
I'd thought about it for a long, long time.
And I always say it was sort of a book that wrote itself.
I actually sort of kind of watched.
I mean, I could watch it coming out on the page without my quite knowing
It was a very extraordinary experience, and it has never happened to me again.
Can you explain?
I didn't know what it was.
What was it that you felt that you had to say?
I don't know, but I think I was very much passing on the experience of people that I was with, these, they were a bit older than me, they were men in their early to middle forties who had all been young, regular officers in the Second World War, and I'd listened to them talking among themselves for years, so, you know,
came years probably.
And I felt that I was eavesdropping on secrets.
And I had all these secrets.
And when I was writing, it was sort of putting secrets together.
Because, you know, you'd hear them, I'm sure you might, sort of in the wardroom on your aircraft carrier, you must have heard people saying, I mean, the sort of thing that you'd hear them saying was,
I remember very well.
Several of them had been in a battle in Tunisia in 1943.
They'd advanced from Egypt, come across North Africa, and they'd got to Tunisia.
And then Hitler sent, reinforced them to fight the Battle of Tunisia at a very high grade.
He sent the Hermann Göring Parachute Commission and people like that.
And I remember they were talking about that, and they were, one of them said, oh, yeah, poor little Gurkhas.
They, of course, they got up against the Hellangaring, didn't they?
And the people said, yes, they didn't know what was happening.
The Germans started playing games.
No, I mean, you have this image of the Gurkhas as the supreme sort of... That's right.
warrior, warrior type.
And they just, I thought, I actually did.
I usually didn't ask persons, I just used to listen.
I said, what do you mean?
I mean, the Germans had them going, they couldn't get better.
So they just started playing games with the Gherkens.
And then, you know, poor little Gherkens, they did their best, but they just got completely, sort of,
They didn't know which direction they were being attacked from.
And it was that sort of thing.
One other quick question.
The lecture you gave is, do you need this kind of offer?
Thank you.
I've got a signing.
Warfare past, present, and future.
Just briefly, what do you say about the future?
I mean, because it is almost... Oh, well, I really ended by saying that, I mean, the very problem at the moment is all these poor countries which are full of
these cheap weapons and cheap kalashnikovs and stuff like that.
You know, you turn the television on and you see 15-year-old boys with kalashnikovs who are mass murderers.
And everybody says scandal, shock, horror.
But you could actually, if you were business-like, you could stop them getting these.
I think stopping the supply of cheap weapons to these crazy countries is really...
a great path to the future.
How about preventing them from getting hold of a nuclear weapon?
Yes, that would be possible.
I mean, that's entirely possible.
That is.
With the breakup of the Soviet air fire and all these out-of-work nuclear scientists.
They know how to do this very well.
And you have this stuff floating around out there.
I mean, that's terrifying, isn't it?
It is terrifying.
What scares me is the nerve gases
I mean, the way people, how easy it would be to pollute a water supply.
Sure.
Anyway, it will be with us.
It will be with the human species.
I'm afraid it's some time to come, yes.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.